record-encryption: document KEK rotation implications and config (#1411)
kroxylicious/kroxylicious: docs/modules/record-encryption/proc-configuring-record-encryption-filter.adoc

      selector: <KEK_selector_service_name> # <3>
      selectorConfig:
        template: "KEK_${topicName}" # <4>
      experimental: # <5>
        "encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds": 7200 # <6>
        "maxEncryptionsPerDek": 5000000 # <7>
	 # ...
----
<1> The KMS service name.
<2> Configuration specific to the KMS provider.
<3> The Key Encryption Key (KEK) selector to use. The `${topicName}` is a literal understood by the proxy. 
For example, if using the `TemplateKekSelector` with the template `KEK_$\{topicName}`, create a key for every topic that
is to be encrypted with the key name matching the topic name, prefixed by the string `KEK_`.
<4> The template for deriving the KEK, based on a specific topic name.

> <5> **Warning**: experimental configurations do not offer compatibility guarantees

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<5> **Warning**: There is no guarantee that options in the experimental section will exist in future releases. Options which are determined to be useful will be promoted to the main config model, other options will be dropped without following a depreciation cycle
```

This is maybe the wrong place to try and document this. I'm also not sure we have made it explicit anywhere that we consider the config model to be public API and thus compliant with semver...

Author: mm the other place we document the deprecation policy is in the DEV_GUIDE which isn't so useful for users, it's more aimed at filter authors.

Think it's a good one to ask in chat, whether we need a user-facing policy for our configuration API compatibility and what it should be if so.

Maybe removing the comment from this PR and solving separately is the right thing?

Author: Have removed the explanation, better to say nothing while it's undefined

> <6> How long to use a DEK for encryption after it has been created, this can be used to control how quickly we use new key material after an external key rotation of the KEK. Note that decreasing this value has a cost in increased operations on the KMS at encrypt and decrypt time, because more DEKs will be created and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<6> How long to use a DEK for encryption after it has been created, this can be used to control how quickly we respond to the fact that a KEK has been rotated externally. Note that tuning this value has a cost implications. Shorter durations will result in increased operations on the KMS at encrypt and decrypt time, because more DEKs will be created and used.
```

Author: incorporated these fixes with a little grammar fix, I've also juggled this description to describe the refresh setting as it's more likely to be the setting that affects an actively used DEK

      selector: <KEK_selector_service_name> # <3>
      selectorConfig:
        template: "KEK_${topicName}" # <4>
      experimental:

>         "encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds": 3600 # <6>

Reviewer 2: why quote the keys?

Author: I must have had some fever dream that you could have different key types and this showed the keys are Strings, will remove em.

        "encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds": 7200 # <7>
        "maxEncryptionsPerDek": 5000000 # <8>
	 # ...
----
<1> The KMS service name.
<2> Configuration specific to the KMS provider.
<3> The Key Encryption Key (KEK) selector to use. The `${topicName}` is a literal understood by the proxy. 
For example, if using the `TemplateKekSelector` with the template `KEK_$\{topicName}`, create a key for every topic that
is to be encrypted with the key name matching the topic name, prefixed by the string `KEK_`.
<4> The template for deriving the KEK, based on a specific topic name.

> <5> How long to use a DEK for encryption after it has been created, after this time the Filter will asynchronously obtain a new DEK while continuing using the old one. This can be used to control how quickly we respond to the fact that a KEK has been rotated externally. Note that tuning this value has a cost implication. Shorter durations will result in increased operations on the KMS at encrypt and decrypt time, because more DEKs will be created and used.

Reviewer 2: the numbers are out by one.

> <5> How long to use a DEK for encryption after it has been created, after this time the Filter will asynchronously obtain a new DEK while continuing using the old one. This can be used to control how quickly we respond to the fact that a KEK has been rotated externally. Note that tuning this value has a cost implication. Shorter durations will result in increased operations on the KMS at encrypt and decrypt time, because more DEKs will be created and used.

Reviewer 2: "How long to use a DEK for encryption after it has been created, after this time the Filter will asynchronously obtain a new DEK while continuing using the old one"

I think those words are misleading.  It makes it sound like the cache will refresh the entry immediately.

If I understand the javadoc (`com.github.benmanes.caffeine.cache.Caffeine#refreshAfterWrite(java.time.Duration)`) right,  the refreshment will be initiated on the **next request**.  But that request will see the stale value. 

So, I think this worst case timeline is possible (default KmsCacheConfig values).

```
00m DEK A created 
60m DEK A marked for refresh but refreshment does not take place. DEK A still in the cache.
1h59m request..  caller gets stale DEK A, refreshment initiated.
(DEK b produced)
2h00m request caller gets DEK b
```

Author: correct, the refresh is triggered on access

> In contrast to expireAfterWrite, refreshAfterWrite will make a key eligible for refresh after the specified duration, but a refresh will only be actually initiated when the entry is queried.

and stale values are still returned during the refresh op

> The old value (if any) is still returned while the key is being refreshed, in contrast to eviction, which forces retrievals to wait until the value is loaded anew.

Your timeline matches my understanding.

https://github.com/ben-manes/caffeine/wiki/Refresh

> <6> How long after creation a DEK is eligible to be evicted from the cache. Only actively used DEKs will be refreshed, this setting puts a bound on how long unused DEKs remain cached.

Reviewer 2: > How long after creation a DEK is eligible to be evicted from the cache.

I think the "eligible to be evicted" part is not helpful.  From the user's point of view, the DEK is removed.  The fact that Caffeine holds on to the entries until the maintenance isn't really relevant to the user.

>  Only actively used DEKs will be refreshed, this setting puts a bound on how long unused DEKs remain cached.

By "use" do you mean "access"?  I don't think use/access is relevant here.  We are only interested in "write" times.

```suggestion
<6> How long after creation a DEK until it is removed from the cache. This setting puts an upper bound on how long a DEK can remain cached.
```

Author: I had a misconception that since the maintenance is periodic:

> Expiration is performed with periodic maintenance during writes and occasionally during reads. Scheduling and firing of an expiration event is executed in amortized O(1) time.

that it would not be guaranteed to be expired exactly at 2h00m and the cache could still return it until eviction.

But  I have confirmed there is code for async and non-async cache implementations that ensures the old value is not returned to clients and your timeline is accurate.

<7> The maximum number of records any DEK should be used to encrypt. After this limit is hit, that DEK will be destroyed and a new one created. As above, reducing the value has a cost because we may create more DEKs.

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd bring the note from the bullet above out into the main body of the doc.

```suggestion
NOTE:  The `encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds`, `encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` and `maxEncryptionsPerDek` settings govern the lifetime of the DEK.  If the DEK has a shorter lifespan, Kroxylicious must call the KMS to generatenew DEKs or decrypt them more often.  The additional KMS API calls will increase produce/consume latency and may increase your KMS provider costs.   Conversely, if DEKs have a longer lifespan the key material may become exhausted/.
```

Author: Have done so, just one question on `Conversely, if DEKs have a longer lifespan the key material may become exhausted`. Does that need elaboration? Are you talking about the user setting the values so high that they exceed the recommended bytes/operations?

Reviewer: I think its the same concept of exhaustion, `maxEncryptionsPerDek` and `encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` are both meant to ensure we don't push too many bytes through a given DEK. 

I haven't looked in detail about how hard it is do arrange but feels a bit odd that we don't actually track the number bytes pushed through a DEK and provide a limit based on that.

Reviewer: Sorry its `encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds` that maps to the exhaustion problem, `encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` is more about limiting the size of a cache and speeds up only decryptions in the 2nd hour.

Author: The difference is "if DEKs have a longer lifespan the key material may become exhausted.", in our code if we decrease the lifespan by setting `maxEncryptionsPerDek` to 1, then the DEK is exhausted very quickly (using the language in our code). But we wouldn't say that we've made it mode likely to exhaust the key material.

Reviewer 2: Yes, sorry, my wording is sloppy, I've conflated the concepts.   Let's fix that.

`maxEncryptionsPerDek` is the control we currently have to prevent key exhaustion.   As Sam says, we ought to add a byte limit (is there an issue?).

`encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds` and `encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` are controls that limit the 'originator usage period' in NIST terminology.

https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5.pdf (page 38).

These controls are about limiting the blast radius if a DEK is leaked

So maybe we reword to split into two paragraphs.

```suggestion
`encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds` and`encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` help govern the "originator usage period" of the DEK. That is the period of time the DEK will be used to encrypt records.  Keeping the period short reduces helps the blast radius in the event that DEK key material is leaked.  However, there is a trade-off.  The additional KMS API calls will increase produce/consume latency and may increase your KMS provider costs.

`maxEncryptionsPerDek` help prevent key exhaustion by placing an upper limit of the amount of times that a DEK may be used to encrypt records.
```

Reviewer 2: > Sorry its encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds that maps to the exhaustion problem, encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds is more about limiting the size of a cache and speeds up only decryptions in the 2nd hour.

Not that it matters much, but I don't see it quite like that.  You could use either to govern the "originator usage period" of the DEK.

The thing that `encryptionDekRefreshAfterWriteSeconds` gives you better producer tail latency control as the DEK refresh occurs in the background.  If you use `encryptionDekExpireAfterWriteSeconds` OTOH, the producer needs to await whilst the KMS generates you a new DEK.

Author: issue created for adding a bytes-encrypted limit to DEKs https://github.com/kroxylicious/kroxylicious/issues/1423

Reviewer: The NIST docs also have some interesting things to say about usage periods for symmetric wrapping keys
>Cryptoperiod: The recommended originator-usage period for a symmetric key-wrapping
key that is used to wrap very large numbers of keys over a short period of time is on the
order of a day or a week. If a relatively small number of keys are to be wrapped under a
key-wrapping key, the originator-usage period of the key-wrapping key could be up to
two years. In the case of a key-wrapping key that is used for only a single message or
communications session, the cryptoperiod would be limited to a single communication
session. It is recommended that a recipient-usage period extend no more than three years
beyond the end of the originator-usage period.

A fleet of proxies generating DEKs will churn through keys. So while KEK rotation is not our direct concern we should be pointing to it. We should also probably add a metric around DEK generation (per KEK??)
